1. What is Spring Boot?

Spring Boot is an extension of the Spring Framework that makes it easy to create stand-alone,
production-ready Spring applications with minimal configuration.

Key Points:

It eliminates the need for complex XML or manual configuration.
It provides defaults for most settings, so you can get started quickly.
It’s opinionated: it chooses sensible defaults, but you can override them.
In Simple Terms:
Spring Boot lets you build Spring applications faster, with less code and configuration.

2. How Does Spring Boot Simplify Spring Usage?
a. Auto-Configuration
Spring Boot automatically configures your application based on the libraries on your classpath.
For example, if you add spring-boot-starter-web, it auto-configures Tomcat, Spring MVC, and
JSON support.
You can override any auto-configuration if you need custom behavior.

Example: Just add the dependency:

xml

<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-web</artifactId>
</dependency>
And Spring Boot will set up a web server for you—no XML or manual setup needed.

b. Starter Dependencies
Starters are pre-defined dependency descriptors you can include in your project.
Each starter brings in a set of commonly used dependencies for a specific feature (web, data,
security, etc.).
This avoids version conflicts and saves you from managing lots of individual dependencies.
Common Starters:

spring-boot-starter-web (for REST APIs and web apps)
spring-boot-starter-data-jpa (for database access with JPA)
spring-boot-starter-security (for security features)

c. Embedded Servers
Spring Boot can run your application with an embedded server (like Tomcat, Jetty, or Undertow).
No need to deploy your app to an external server—just run your JAR file and it works.
This makes development, testing, and deployment much easier.
Example: You can run your app with:

bash

mvn spring-boot:run

or

bash

java -jar target/myapp.jar

and it starts an embedded web server automatically.

3. Spring Boot Architecture Overview:

a. Layers of Spring Boot:

Starters:
Provide ready-to-use dependencies for common features.

Auto-Configuration:
Automatically configures beans based on your project’s dependencies and settings.

Spring Boot CLI:
Command-line tool for running and testing Spring Boot apps.

Actuator:
Adds production-ready features like health checks, metrics, and monitoring.

Embedded Servers:
Lets you run your app as a stand-alone JAR with an embedded web server.

b. How a Typical Spring Boot App Works:

You write your main class with @SpringBootApplication:

@SpringBootApplication
public class MyApp {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication.run(MyApp.class, args);
    }
}

You add your controllers, services, and repositories as usual.
Spring Boot auto-configures everything based on your dependencies and properties.
You run your app as a simple Java application—no external server or XML needed.

4. Advantages of Spring Boot

Feature	                          Benefit

Auto-Configuration	              Reduces boilerplate, speeds up setup
Starter Dependencies	          Simplifies dependency management, avoids version conflicts
Embedded Servers	              Easy to run, test, and deploy apps as stand-alone JARs
Production-Ready	              Built-in health checks, metrics, and monitoring with Actuator
Convention Over Configuration	  Sensible defaults, but fully customizable
Microservices Ready	              Ideal for building microservices architectures